=encoding utf-8


=head1 lua-resty-route


B<lua-resty-route> is a URL routing library for OpenResty supporting
multiple route matchers, middleware, and HTTP and WebSockets handlers
to mention a few of its features.


=head2 Matchers


C<lua-resty-route> supports multiple different matchers on routing. Right now
we support these:


=over


=item *

Prefix (case-sensitive and case-insensitive)

=item *

Equals (case-sensitive and case-insensitive)

=item *

Match (using Lua's C<string.match> function)

=item *

Regex (case-sensitive and case-insensitive)

=item *

Simple (case-sensitive and case-insensitive)


=back

Matcher is selected by a prefix in a route's pattern, and they do somewhat
follow the Nginx's C<location> block prefixes:

Prefix   | Matcher | Case-sensitive | Used by Default
---------|---------|----------------|----------------
C<[none]> | Prefix  | ✓              | ✓
C<*>      | Prefix  |                |
C<=>      | Equals  | ✓              |
C<=*>     | Equals  |                |
C<#>      | Match   | ¹              |
C<~>      | Regex   | ✓              |
C<~*>     | Regex   |                |
C<@>      | Simple  | ✓              |
C<@*>     | Simple  |                |

¹ Lua C<string.match> can be case-sensitive or case-insensitive.


=head3 Prefix Matcher


Prefix, as the name tells, matches only the prefix of the actual location.
Prefix matcher takes only static string prefixes. If you need anything more
fancy, take a look at regex matcher. Prefix can be matched case-insensitively
by prefixing the prefix with C<*>, :-). Let's see this in action:


    route "/users" (function(self) end)

This route matches locations like:


=over


=item *

C</users>

=item *

C</users/edit>

=item *

C</users_be_aware>


=back

But it B<doesn't> match location paths like:


=over


=item *

C</Users>

=item *

C</USERS/EDIT>


=back

But those can be still be matched in case-insensitive way:


    route "*/users" (function(self) end)


=head3 Equals Matcher


This works the same as the prefix matcher, but with this
we match the exact location, to use this matcher, prefix
the route with C<=>:


    route "=/users" {
        get = function(self) end
    }

This route matches only this location:


=over


=item *

C</users> 


=back

Case-insensitive variant can be used also:


    route "=*/users" {
        get = function(self) end
    }

And this of course matches locations like:


=over


=item *

C</users>

=item *

C</USERS>

=item *

C</usErs>


=back


=head3 Match Matcher


This matcher matches patters using Lua's C<string.match> function. Nice
thing about this matcher is that it accepts patterns and also provides
captures. Check Lua's documentation about possible ways to define
L<patterns|https://www.lua.org/manual/5.1/manual.html#5.4.1>. Here are
some examples:


    route "#/files/(%w+)[.](%w+)" {
        get = function(self, file, ext) end
    }

This will match location paths like:


=over


=item *

C</files/test.txt> etc.


=back

In that case the provided function (that answers only HTTP C<GET>
requests in this example), will be called also with these captures:
C<"test"> (function argument C<file>) and C<txt> (function argument C<ext>).

For many, the regular expressions are more familiar and more powerfull. 
That is what we will look next.


=head3 Regex Matcher


Regex or regular expressions is a common way to do pattern matching.
OpenResty has support for PCRE compatible regualar expressions, and
this matcher in particular, uses C<ngx.re.match> function:


    route [[~^/files/(\w+)[.](\w+)$]] {
        get = function(self, file, ext) end
    }

As with the Match matcher example above, the end results are the same
and the function will be called with the captures.

For Regex matcher we also have case-insensitive version:


    route [[~*^/files/(\w+)[.](\w+)$]] {
        get = function(self, file, ext) end
    }


=head3 Simple Matcher


This matcher is a specialized and limited version of a Regex matcher
with one advantage. It handles type conversions automatically, right
now it only supports integer conversion to Lua number. For example:


    route:get "@/users/:number" (function(self, id) end)

You could have location path like:


=over


=item *

C</users/45>


=back

The function above will get C<45> as a Lua C<number>.

Supported simple capturers are:


=over


=item *

C<:string>, that is equal to this regex C<[^/]+> (one or more chars, not including C</>)

=item *

C<:number>, that is equal to this regex C<\d+> (one or more digits that can be turned to Lua number using C<tonumber> function)


=back

In future, we may add other capture shortcuts.

Of course there is a case-insensitive version for this matcher as well:


    route:get "@*/users/:number" (function(self, id) end)

The simple matcher always matches the location from the beginning to end (partial
matches are not considered).


=head2 Routing


There are many different ways to define routes in C<lua-resty-route>.
It can be said that it is somewhat a Lua DSL for defining routes.

To define routes, you first need a new instance of route. This instance
can be shared with different requests. You may create the routes in
C<init_by_lua*>. Here we define a new route instance:


    local route = require "resty.route".new()

Now that we do have this C<route> instance, we may continue to a next
section, L<HTTP Routing>.

B<Note:> Routes are tried in the order they are added when dispatched.
This differs from how Nginx itself handles the C<location> blocks.


=head3 HTTP Routing


HTTP routing is the most common thing to do in web related routing. That's
why HTTP routing is the default way to route in C<lua-resty-route>. Other
types of routing include e.g. L<WebSockets routing>.

The most common HTTP request methods (sometimes referred to as verbs) are:

Method   | Definition
---------|-----------
C<GET>    | Read
C<POST>   | Create
C<PUT>    | Update or Replace
C<PATCH>  | Update or Modify
C<DELETE> | Delete

While these are the most common ones, C<lua-resty-route> is not by any means
restricted to these. You may use whatever request methods there is just like
these common ones. But to keep things simple here, we will just use these in
the examples.


=head4 The General Pattern in Routing



    route(...)
    route:method(...)

or


    route(method, pattern, func)
    route:method(pattern, func)

e.g.:


    route("get", "/", function(self) end)
    route:get("/", function(self) end)

Only the first function argument is mandatory. That's why we can
call these functions in a quite flexible ways. For some C<methods>,
e.g. websocket, we can pass a C<table> instead of a C<function> as
a route handler. Next we look at different ways to call these
functions.


=head4 Defining Routes as a Table



    route "=/users" {
        get  = function(self) end,
        post = function(self) end
    }
    local users = {
        get  = function(self) end,
        post = function(self) end
    }
    route "=/users" (users)
    route("=/users", users)


=head4 Using Lua Packages for Routing



    route "=/users"  "controllers.users"
    route("=/users", "controllers.users")

These are same as:


    route("=/users", require "controllers.users")


=head4 Defining Multiple Methods at Once



    route { "get", "head" } "=/users" (function(self) end)


=head4 Defining Multiple Routes at Once



    route {
        ["/"] = function(self) end,
        ["=/users"] = {
            get  = function(self) end,
            post = function(self) end
        }
    }


=head4 Routing all the HTTP Request Methods



    route "/" (function(self) end)
    route("/", function(self) end)


=head4 The Catch all Route



    route(function(self) end)


=head4 Going Crazy with Routing



    route:as "@home" (function(self) end)
    route {
        get = {
            ["=/"] = "@home",
            ["=/users"] = function(self) end
        },
        ["=/help"] = function(self) end,
        [{ "post", "put"}] = {
            ["=/me"] = function(self)
            end
        },
        ["=/you"] = {
            [{ "get", "head" }] = function(self) end
        },
        [{ "/files", "/cache" }] = {
            -- requiring controllers.filesystem returns a function
            [{"get", "head" }] = "controllers.filesystem"
        }
    }

As you may see this is pretty freaky. But it doesn't actually
stop here. I haven't even mentioned things like callable Lua
tables (aka tables with metamethod C<__call>) or web sockets
routing. They are supported as well.


=head3 WebSockets Routing



=head3 File System Routing


File system routing is based on a file system tree. This could be
considered as a routing by a convention. File system routing depends
on either L<LuaFileSystem|https://github.com/keplerproject/luafilesystem>
module or a preferred and LFS compatible
L<ljsyscall|https://github.com/justincormack/ljsyscall>.

As an example, let's consider that we do have this kind of file tree:


    /routing/
     ├─ index.lua 
     ├─ users.lua
     └─ users/
     │  ├─ view@get.lua
     │  ├─ edit@post.lua
     │  └─ #/
     │     └─ index.lua
     └─ page/
        └─ #.lua

This file tree will provide you with the following routes:


=over


=item *

C<@*/> → C<index.lua>

=item *

C<@*/users> → C<users.lua>

=item *

C<@*/users/view> → C<users/view@get.lua> (only GET requests are routed here)

=item *

C<@*/users/edit> → C<users/edit@post.lua> (only POST requests are routed here)

=item *

C<@*/users/:number> → C<users/#/index.lua>

=item *

C<@*/page/:number> → C<page/#.lua>


=back

The files could look like this (just an example):

C<index.lua>:


    return {
        get  = function(self) end,
        post = function(self) end
    }

C<users.lua>:


    return {
        get    = function(self) end,
        post   = function(self) end,
        delete = function(self) end
    }   

C<users/view@get.lua>:


    return function(self) end

C<users/edit@post.lua>:


    return function(self) end

C<users/#/index.lua>:


    return {
        get    = function(self, id) end,
        put    = function(self, id) end,
        post   = function(self, id) end,
        delete = function(self, id) end
    }

C<page/#.lua>:


    return {
        get    = function(self, id) end,
        put    = function(self, id) end,
        post   = function(self, id) end,
        delete = function(self, id) end
    }

To define routes based on file system tree you will need to call C<route:fs>
function:


    -- Here we assume that you do have /routing directory
    -- on your file system. You may use whatever path you
    -- like, absolute or relative.
    route:fs "/routing"

Using file system routing you can just add new files to file system tree,
and they will be added automatically as a routes.


=head3 Named Routes


You can define named route handlers, and then reuse them in actual routes.


    route:as "@home" (function(self) end)

(the use of C<@> as a prefix for a named route is optional)

And here we actually attach it to a route:


    route:get "/" "@home"

You can also define multiple named routes in a one go:


    route:as {
        home    = function(self) end,
        signin  = function(self) end,
        signout = function(self) end
    }

or if you want to use prefixes:


    route:as {
        ["@home"]    = function(self) end,
        ["@signin"]  = function(self) end,
        ["@signout"] = function(self) end
    }

Named routes must be defined before referencing them in routes.
There are or will be other uses to named routers as well. On todo
list there are things like reverse routing and route forwarding to
a named route.


=head2 Middleware


Middleware in C<lua-resty-route> can be defined on either on per request
or per route basis. Middleware are filters that you can add to the request
processing pipeline. As C<lua-resty-route> tries to be as unopionated as
possible we don't really restrict what the filters do or how they have to
be written. Middleware can be inserted just flexible as routes, and they
actually do share much of the logic. With one impotant difference. You can
have multiple middleware on the pipeline whereas only one matchin route
will be executed. The middleware can also be yielded (C<coroutine.yield>),
and that allows code to be run before and after the router (you can yield
a router as well, but that will never be resumed). If you don't yield,
then the middleware is considered as a before filter.

The most common type of Middleware is request level middleware:


    route:use(function(self)
        -- This code will be run before router:
        -- ...
        self.yield() -- or coroutine.yield()
        -- This code will be run after the router:
        -- ...
    end)

Now, as you were already hinted, you may add filters to specific routes as well:


    route.filter "=/" (function(self)
        -- this middleware will only be called on a specific route
    end)

You can use the same rules as with routing there, e.g.


    route.filter:post "middleware.csrf"

Of course you can also do things like:


    route.filter:delete "@/users/:number" (function(self, id)
        -- here we can say prevent deleting the user who
        -- issued the request or something.
    end)

All the matching middleware is run on every request, unless one of them
decides to C<exit>, but we do always try to run after filters for those
middleware that already did run, and yielded. But we will call them in
reverse order:


=over


=item 1.

middleware 1 runs and yields

=item 2.

middleware 2 runs (and finishes)

=item 3.

middleware 3 runs and yields

=item 4.

router runs

=item 5.

middleware 3 resumes

=item 6.

middleware 1 resumes


=back

The order of middleware is by scope:


=over


=item 1.

request level middleware is executed first

=item 2.

router level middleware is executed second


=back

If there are multiple requet or router level middleware, then they will be
executed the same order they were added to a specific scope. Yielded middleware
is executed in reverse order. Yielded middleware will only be resumed once.

Internally we do use Lua's great C<coroutines>.

We are going to support a bunch of predefined middleware in a future.


=head2 Events


Events allow you to register specialized handlers for different HTTP status
codes or other predefined event codes. There can be only one handler for each
code or code group.

You can for example define C<404> aka route not found handler like this:


    route:on(404, function(self) end)

Some groups are predefined, e.g.:


=over


=item *

C<info>, status codes 100 – 199

=item *

C<success>, status codes 200 – 299

=item *

C<redirect>, status codes 300 – 399

=item *

C<client error>, status codes 400 – 499

=item *

C<server error>, status codes 500 – 599

=item *

C<error>, status codes 400 – 599


=back

You may use groups like this:


    route:on "error" (function(self, code) end)

You can also define multiple event handlers in a one go:


    route:on {
        error   = function(self, code) end,
        success = function(self, code) end,
        [302]   = function(self) end
    }

Then there is a generic catch-all event handler:


    route:on(function(self, code) end)

We will find the right event handler in this order:


=over


=item 1.

if there is a specific handler for a specific code, we will call that

=item 2.

if there is a group handler for specific code, we will call that

=item 3.

if there is a catch-all handler, we will call that


=back

Only one of these is called per event.

It is possible that we will add other handlers in a future where you could
hook on.


=head3 Router API


You may have seen in previous examples functions get as a first
parameter a C<self>. The C<self> represents a C<router> that contains
many nice functions documented below.

While the above so called C<Route API> is for defining the routes,
the C<Router API> is actually about running the routes.


=head4 router.context


This is really powerful concept here to share data between
different routes and functions. Many middleware will be
inserted to context.

E.g. a redis middleware could add C<redis> object to C<context>
so that you could just:


    local ok, err = self.redis:set("cat", "tommy")

Opening and closing the Redis connection is something that the
middleware does automatically before scenes. It means that you
don't need to initiate or close the connections to Redis server,
but this small C<framework> takes care of this. As you see, this
C<self> parameter is automatically passed around different layers
of this framework, and this context makes it easy to pass data
between them.


=head4 router.yield()


Is similar to C<coroutine.yield()> but as you have seen above
in middlewares section, it is quite nice to just call C<self.yield()>
instead to split middleware to before and after C<filters>,
it also makes us possible to add e.g. debugging / profiling code
in a future. C<self.yield()> is more self explaining what happens
and makes code easier to read (may be subjective opinion).


=head4 router:redirect(uri, code)


Similar to C<ngx.redirect> but runs redirect event handler and
after filters before actually calling C<ngx.redirect> with C<code>
(or C<ngx.HTTP_MOVED_TEMPORARILY> if not specified) and ending
the handler.


=head4 router:exit(uri, code)


Similar to C<ngx.exit> but runs event handler and after filters
before actually calling C<ngx.exit> with C<code> (or C<ngx.OK>
if not specified) and ending the handler.


=head4 router:exec(uri, args)


Similar to C<ngx.exec> but runs event handler and after filters
before actually calling C<ngx.exec> and ending the handler. 


=head4 router:done()


Similar to C<ngx.exit> with C<ngx.HTTP_OK> but runs event handler
and after filters before actually calling C<ngx.exit> and ending
the handler.


=head4 router:abort()


This is reserved for C<ngx.on_abort> usage (NYI). Right now only
calls C<ngx.exit(499)> after running event handler and after
filters.


=head4 router:fail(error, code)


If C<error> is a string, then logs it to error log. Otherwise it
is similar to C<ngx.exit(code)> (by default the C<code> is
C<ngx.HTTP_INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR>) but runs event handler and
after filters before actually calling C<ngx.exit>and ending
the handler.


=head4 router:to(location, method)


Allows you to execute another route (defined by C<route>).


=head4 router:render(content, context)


Writes content to output stream. If there is a C<context.template>
then it will call C<context.template.render(content, context or self.context)>.


=head4 router:json(data)


Encodes data as JSON, adds C<application/json> content-type
header and outputs the JSON.


=head4 router:*


A lot more can be added here to make writing code less repetive,
but a lot can be done with injecting into C<self.context> as well.


=head2 Roadmap


This is a small collection of ideas that may or may not be implemented as
a part of C<lua-resty-route>.


=over


=item *

Add documentation

=item *

Add tests

=item *

Rewrite current middleware and add new ones

=item *

Rewrite current websocket handler

=item *

Add route statistics

=item *

Add an automatic route cleaning and redirecting (possibly configurable) (clean function is already written)

=item *

Add an automatic slash handling and redirecting (possibly configurable)

=item *

Add a more automated way to define redirects

=item *

Add a support for route caching

=item *

Add a support to route by host

=item *

Add a support to route by headers

=item *

Add a support for Nginx phases

=item *

Add a support for easy way to define Web Hooks routes

=item *

Add a support for easy way to define Server Sent Events routes

=item *

Add a support for "provides", e.g. renderers (?)

=item *

Add a support for conditions, e.g. content negotiation

=item *

Add a support for route grouping (already possible on Nginx at config level)

=item *

Add a support for reverse routing

=item *

Add a support for form method spoofing

=item *

Add a support for client connection abort event handler (C<ngx.on_abort>)

=item *

Add a support for host (and possibly) other headers filtering

=item *

Add a support for basic authentication

=item *

Add a support for JWT / OpenID Connect authentication

=item *

Add bootstrapping functionality from Nginx configs

=item *

Add support for resources (or view sets) (a more automated REST-routing)

=item *

Add filesystem routing support for resources (or view sets)


=back


=head2 See Also



=over


=item *

L<lua-resty-reqargs|https://github.com/bungle/lua-resty-reqargs> — Request arguments parser

=item *

L<lua-resty-session|https://github.com/bungle/lua-resty-session> — Session library

=item *

L<lua-resty-template|https://github.com/bungle/lua-resty-template> — Templating engine

=item *

L<lua-resty-validation|https://github.com/bungle/lua-resty-validation> — Validation and filtering library


=back


=head2 License


C<lua-resty-route> uses two clause BSD license.


    Copyright (c) 2015 – 2017, Aapo Talvensaari
    All rights reserved.
    
    Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification,
    are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
    
    * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
      list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
    
    * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this
      list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or
      other materials provided with the distribution.
    
    THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND
    ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
    WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
    DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR
    ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES`
